# Role of AI in Telecommunication

 

The telecommunication industry has been evolving dynamically since the 90’s era, enabling and improving communications effectively for various industries. This industry has been facing several challenges including customer churn, network congestion, growing customer demands, humongous data growth, and degraded network infrastructure quality.

Recent advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) including machine learning, deep learning, speech recognition, generative AI and computer vision have made an outstanding contribution to telecommunications to solve the complex issues that the world is facing today.

## Leveraging the capabilities of AI in Telecommunication

In recent years, the telecommunication industry has seen a paradigm shift in adopting AI technology to improve its operational efficiency, customer engagement, network optimization, and reduce operational expenses. AI can predict network congestion, customer behaviour, and hard failures by using time series and regression algorithms, allowing telcos to plan and replace resources, before they breakdown, for uninterrupted services.

Let us discuss deeply how AI addresses the challenges faced by telecommunication below:

### Network Operational Efficiency

Telecom networks have been designed to handle a limited amount of data, but with the growing demands of customers, data and its storage also rapidly increased, thereby reducing the operational efficiency of network infrastructure. The advancements in AI helped to optimize the network infrastructure by identifying the bottlenecks in the network nodes and recognizing the malfunctioning of network devices.

### Forecast and Predictive Maintenance

AI algorithms like time-series forecasting, and regression analysis have been used in predicting the hardware failures before they occur and are visible to the administrators. This innovative approach leads to improved service reliability by reducing downtime due to maintenance.

### Customer Experience Enhancement

With the invention of chatbots, and virtual assistants, customers can address their problems including billing, plan inquiries, and other technical issues via automated mechanisms using virtual assistants and get solutions without human intervention. AI can recommend to the customers the telecom operator's upcoming plans, and other services by identifying the patterns in customer behavior.

### Fraud Prevention and Security

AI algorithms can detect the patterns in customer data and identify malicious messages like OTPs, and e-commerce messages including transactional and fraudulent promotional activities and block them before reaching the customers. AI helps in improving the security posture of a network by identifying the weak nodes in the network and implementing the security protocols like hashing, and encryption to mitigate risks posed by phishing, hacking and other cybercrime activities.

### 5G and AR/VR devices

The advancements in AI help in improving network quality by slicing the network nodes in a network infrastructure. The network slices work for a specific use case such as AR/VR and IoT devices. AI improves the bandwidth of a signal in a specific region by analyzing real-time data and identifying patterns in network usage.

### Network Analytics and Churn Prediction

AI algorithms process humongous data generated by telcos and provide actionable insights in the form of dashboards, improving decision-making and enabling better capacity planning and allocating resources. AI analyzes vast amounts of customer data and identifies patterns in customer behaviour like customer churn (who may leave the network), enabling telcos to consider necessary steps to prevent customer churn.
